                                         ShareJIT: JIT Code Cache Sharing across Processes and Its
                                         Practical Implementation

                                         XIAORAN XU, Rice University, USA
arXiv:1810.09555v1 [cs.PL] 22 Oct 2018




                                         KEITH COOPER, Rice University, USA
                                         JACOB BROCK, University of Rochester, USA
                                         YAN ZHANG, Futurewei Technologies, USA
                                         HANDONG YE, Futurewei Technologies, USA
                                         Just-in-time (JIT) compilation coupled with code caching are widely used to improve performance in dynamic
                                         programming language implementations. These code caches, along with the associated profiling data for the
                                         hot code, however, consume significant amounts of memory. Furthermore, they incur extra JIT compilation
                                         time for their creation. On Android, the current standard JIT compiler and its code caches are not shared
                                         among processesÔÇöthat is, the runtime system maintains a private code cache, and its associated data, for
                                         each runtime process. However, applications running on the same platform tend to share multiple libraries in
                                         common. Sharing cached code across multiple applications and multiple processes can lead to a reduction
                                         in memory use. It can directly reduce compile time. It can also reduce the cumulative amount of time spent
                                         interpreting code. All three of these effects can improve actual runtime performance.
                                            In this paper, we describe ShareJIT, a global code cache for JITs that can share code across multiple
                                         applications and multiple processes. We implemented ShareJIT in the context of the Android Runtime (ART),
                                         a widely used, state-of-the-art system. To increase sharing, our implementation constrains the amount of
                                                                                                                                                                        124
                                         context that the JIT compiler can use to optimize the code. This exposes a fundamental tradeoff: increased
                                         specialization to a single processÔÇÖ context decreases the extent to which the compiled code can be shared. In
                                         ShareJIT, we limit some optimization to increase shareability. To evaluate the ShareJIT, we tested 8 popular
                                         Android apps in a total of 30 experiments. ShareJIT improved overall performance by 9% on average, while
                                         decreasing memory consumption by 16% on average and JIT compilation time by 37% on average.
                                         CCS Concepts: ÔÇó Software and its engineering Ôćĺ Just-in-time compilers; Dynamic compilers; Run-
                                         time environments; Source code generation; ÔÇó Computer systems organization Ôćĺ Embedded systems;
                                         Additional Key Words and Phrases: JIT Compilation, Code Cache Sharing, Android Runtime System
                                         ACM Reference Format:
                                         Xiaoran Xu, Keith Cooper, Jacob Brock, Yan Zhang, and Handong Ye. 2018. ShareJIT: JIT Code Cache Shar-
                                         ing across Processes and Its Practical Implementation. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 2, OOPSLA, Article 124
                                         (November 2018), 23 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3276494

                                         1   INTRODUCTION
                                         Runtime systems, execution engines and emulators for dynamic languages typically employ Just-
                                         in-Time (JIT) compilation on frequently executed sequences, and store the resulting compiled code
                                         in code caches for the use of subsequent executions. This technique improves the execution speed
                                         AuthorsÔÇÖ addresses: Xiaoran Xu, Rice University, USA, xiaoran.xu@rice.edu; Keith Cooper, Rice University, USA, keith@
                                         rice.edu; Jacob Brock, University of Rochester, USA, jbrock@cs.rochester.edu; Yan Zhang, Futurewei Technologies, USA,
                                         yan.zhang@huawei.com; Handong Ye, Futurewei Technologies, USA, ye.handong@huawei.com.

                                         Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
                                         provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
                                         the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses,
                                         contact the owner/author(s).
                                         ┬ę 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
                                         2475-1421/2018/11-ART124
                                         https://doi.org/10.1145/3276494


                                                                   Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
124:2                            Xiaoran Xu, Keith Cooper, Jacob Brock, Yan Zhang, and Handong Ye

of those hot sequences, but it also consumes significant amounts of memory and CPU resources
to generate and store those code caches, along with the data structures to manage them. As JIT
compilers have matured, they have been extended to include aggressive optimization, profiling
and other features. The resulting growth in code size and associated data structures, coupled
with the presence of code caches in many distinct and simultaneous processes, has created a
situation where the memory occupied by code caches and the CPU cycles used to manage them can
degrade the systemÔÇÖs overall performance. Since applications running on the same platform tend to
share multiple common libraries, e.g. graphics libraries in Android, user-interface and animation
libraries in JavaScript, and general software development frameworks, the opportunity for sharing
cached code and amortizing costs exists. However, the virtual machines (VM) that execute those
applications are isolated, which forces repeated, independent compilation of shared libraries in
multiple VMs, along with duplicate copies of the compiled code kept in process-private code caches.
   This obvious drawback of the current software architecture motivates our work: sharing JIT
code caches across applications. During the exploration of this idea, we have encountered several
challenges. First of all, most JIT compilers leverage both runtime context and profile information
to generate optimized code. The compiled code may be embedded with runtime-specific pointers,
simplified through unique class-hierarchy analysis, or inlined recursively. Each of these "improve-
ments" can decrease the ÔÇťshareabilityÔÇŁ of JIT compiled code. Managing the trade-off between more
highly optimized code and more shareable code is a serious problem. A second challenge for this
work is choosing the granularity of code to share. If we choose to share at the class level, that will
require changes to both the memory layout and management of the class-data area and the heap;
those actions, in turn, will weaken the portability of the sharing system. If we choose to share at
the method level, that will require a guarantee that the class data referenced by a method will be
located consistently and correctly in each runtime system. Other challenges arise, including the
need for new polices for updating the shared code cache and garbage-collecting it; determining if
two runtime methods from different processes are functionally equivalent; and discovering the right
timing to move from local interpretation to global sharing of compiled code. This paper presents
a new code caching and sharing architecture, ShareJIT, which addresses all of these problems
mentioned. It describes one implementation, in the Android Operating System (OS), and several
open implementation options. The experiments section (Section 5) shows performance results from
running ShareJIT on a collection of popular apps.
   We decided to implement ShareJIT in Android due to both the ubiquity of Android devices and
their resource constrained environments. It appears that Android production apps are growing
in size; at the same time, the market expansion of Android devices into developing countries is
creating a base of systems with smaller RAM configurations. These twin pressures make memory
efficient execution of apps a pressing problem. The problem is serious enough that Google is already
targeting small-memory devices (as little as 512MB to 1GB of RAM) with a separate version of
Android Oreo (Go Edition). The Go Edition uses about half the memory footprint of Android N,
and ships with slimmed-down versions of popular Google apps [Google 2018a; TeamAA 2018].
ShareJIT provides a partial answer to the problem of reducing memory pressure in app execution
by identifying code that is used by multiple apps and allowing the apps to share JIT compiled
versions of this code. This approach has the added benefit of reducing JIT warm-up time in cases
where an app can use a method that has already been compiled by another app.

Contributions: The main contributions of this paper are,
    ÔÇó A design of a global JIT code cache that shares across different processes, with minimal
      modifications to the VM layer memory layout. ShareJIT was designed to port easily to other
      versions of the runtime system.

Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
ShareJIT: JIT Code Cache Sharing across Processes and Its Practical Implementation                         124:3

      ÔÇó A set of policies to update and garbage-collect the global shared code cache, which coordinates
        and orchestrates all participating processes.
      ÔÇó A cost model that analyzes the performance-critical parameters in sharing compiled code
        among inter-process methods.
      ÔÇó A detailed implementation in Android 7 and evaluation on 8 widely used mobile applications
        that have billions of downloads. ShareJIT achieves an average of 16% reduction in memory
        usage and an average of 9% speedup in overall performance.
  The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 explains the background knowledge of
Android Runtime system which is integral to the implementation of ShareJIT. Section 3 describes
the architecture and implementation of ShareJIT, including its key components, workflow, as well as
garbage collection policies for the global shared cache. Section 4 builds a cost model for ShareJIT to
analyze the performance-critical parameters, and examines how to set thresholds to most effectively
share compiled code. Section 5 demonstrates our experiments and discusses the results. Section 6
outlines related work and Section 7 offers conclusions.

2     THE ANDROID RUNTIME
The Android Runtime (ART) system was introduced in Android 5 (Lollipop) as a new execution
model for application code. Since then, the internal structure of ART has evolved. When we
started the ShareJIT project, Android 7 (Nougat) was the newest version, so we used it to implement
ShareJIT. In the rest of this paper, we use ÔÇťARTÔÇŁ to refer to the runtime in Android 7.1.1_r26, a device-
specific version of Android Nougat for the Google Pixel Phone. The following sub-sections briefly
introduce background knowledge of ART to help demonstrate the implementation of ShareJIT in
Section 3.

2.1    Zygote Process
As mentioned in Section 1, a large fraction of Android devices suffer from the tightening resource
constraints. On such devices, launching an app can cause noticeable delays. To address this problem,
ART provides a specialized processÔÇözygote, that spawns all other app processes. Zygote starts
execution during the Android OS startup; it is initialized by preloading all the runtime Java classes
and other shared resources that make up AndroidÔÇÖs rich frameworks. Because all other app processes
start as a fork from zygote, they inherit zygoteÔÇÖs memory and resources. We may think of zygote
as a ÔÇťwarmed-upÔÇŁ process that speeds the startup of every other appÔÇÖs virtual machine. ShareJIT
makes critical use of zygoteÔÇÖs implicit resource sharing; it creates data structures for the global JIT
cache in the zygote that are therefore shared to all other app processes. (See details in Section 3.1.)

2.2    JIT Compiler and Cache
Brock et al. [2018] provide a description of the JIT compilation policy and the code cache structure
in Android N. As background, we summarize that here. First, ART compiles at method granu-
larity instead of trace granularity (a trace is any series of instructions that may span multiple
methods). The advantage of this is a simpler compiler implementation, and reducing overhead for
managing compiled code to achieve better performance [Inoue et al. 2011]. The method-granularity
compilation in ART makes sharing of compiled code feasible.
   There are three separate hotness thresholds used for JIT compilation. After 5,000 method invoca-
tions or loop iterations, the method is ÔÇťwarmÔÇŁ and ART begins profiling the method and schedules
it for ahead-of-time compilation when the device is idle and charging. After 10,000, the method
is ÔÇťhotÔÇŁ queued for JIT compilation. Finally, if a methodÔÇÖs hotness reaches 20,000, it is likely to be
in a hot loop. Thus, the method is scheduled with high priority for on-stack replacement (OSR)

                       Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
124:4                              Xiaoran Xu, Keith Cooper, Jacob Brock, Yan Zhang, and Handong Ye

compilation. The code produced by OSR is invoked by some specialized bytecode, which is typically
a loop-closing branch. (The branch is replaced by code that invokes the OSR-compiled method.)
Once the OSR compilation is completed, the interpreter will jump to the OSR-compiled code when
it next crosses the specialized entry bytecode in the middle of the method.
   ShareJIT does not share OSR-compiled code, because of the way that code is invoked. Instead,
ShareJIT limits sharing to code compiled at the ÔÇťhotÔÇŁ threshold (10,000); that code presents a
standard method-invocation interface.
   The JIT cache1 initially allocates separate but adjacent 32 kB areas for code and data (stack maps
and profile information for methods). Whenever either space becomes full, garbage collection is
triggered. Garbage collection occurs in two modes, partial collection and full collection, and they
are performed alternately. Partial collection removes non-entrant code and increases both code and
data cache capacity equally. Full collection additionally removes the profile information of methods
which are warm but not yet hot, along with code that has not been executed since the last partial
collection. If the current JIT cache capacity is already at the maximum capacity (64 MB) and the
collection could not free any space, the compiled code is discarded.

2.3     From Dex Code to Machine Instructions
Android applications are often compiled from Java bytecode or directly from Java to ARTÔÇÖs dedicated
register-based dex bytecode format [Google 2018b]. The dex file format [Google 2018c] (.dex ) is
structured differently from Java bytecode files (.class ). A .class file only contains one Java class.
During runtime, the JVM will dynamically load the bytecode for each class from its corresponding
.class file. By contrast, a .dex file may contain all the classes of an Android app. The constant
pool is a per-class data structure existing in each Java .class file, but in a .dex file it is a global
data structure shared by all classes. Thus, each symbolic reference in a .dex file is unique; if
multiple classes reference the same constant, the .dex file will have a single copy of that value.
This is space-efficient but also has the side effect of limiting the number of references to 216 , since
the global reference index is represented as an unsigned 16-bit integer. So from Android 5, ART
started to support multiple .dex files for apps whose references are more than 216 [Google 2018d].
   The global namespace of symbolic references in the dex file format leads to a different sym-
bolic reference resolution procedure in ART compared with those in standard JVM. Symbolic
reference resolution is an optional phase of class linking in dynamic language execution. It is a
process for a dynamic languageÔÇÖs virtual machine to locate classes, interfaces, fields, and meth-
ods referenced symbolically from a typeÔÇÖs constant pool, and replace those symbolic references
with direct references. Resolution only touches a typeÔÇÖs constant pool entries but not the method
bytecodes that reference them. But ART implements resolution as, (1) locating a global symbolic
index referenced by a dex method when itÔÇÖs invoked; (2) storing the resolution result in a local,
per-class data structure called the ÔÇťdex cacheÔÇŁ, which is similar to constant pool, but only contains
resolved references; (3) replacing the global symbolic index used in the dex method bytecode with
the local index in the dex cache. (Note that the runtime representation of class data in the JVM is
immutable.)
   Whether it is a global symbolic index or a local dex cache index, the ART JIT compiler will encode
the index itself, but not the direct address it references, into the compiled code when generating
machine instructions as long as thereÔÇÖs no optimization associated to this index. (See details in
section 3.3) When the compiled code is executed as a frame in the virtual machine stack, a reference
to the runtime constant pool (dex cache) of the class of the current method is maintained, so that
the real direct address can be located. Unresolved references will trigger a resolution request that
1 When we refer to ÔÇťJIT cacheÔÇŁ, we intend to both the JIT code cache and the JIT data cache, together.



Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
ShareJIT: JIT Code Cache Sharing across Processes and Its Practical Implementation                       124:5




                          Fig. 1. The layout of the memory areas of ShareJIT



will be handled by the runtime system. Under such code generation rules, ShareJIT only needs to
guarantee that all the symbolic references that two dex methods use at runtime are the same when
sharing compiled code from one method to another, while it does not care about the absolute direct
addresses they reference in each virtual machine.

3     THE DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION OF SHAREJIT
3.1    ShareJIT Internals
ShareJIT consists of two key components: a global JIT cache and a global sharing map. Figure 1 shows
the layout of the memory areas of ShareJIT. The left side of the figure shows the shared memory
space and the right side shows an example processÔÇÖs private memory space. Shared memories
across processes are implemented as regions of Android Shared Memory (Ashmem), a component
provided by Android OS to facilitate memory sharing. It is supported by the POSIX shared memory
(Shmem) API in the kernel but wrapped with features to alleviate the low-memory pressure on
Android devices. An Ashmem region is simply a memory segment backed by a file/device-driver,
which can be mapped into the virtual address space of any process that has the file descriptor of
that Ashmem region.
   ShareJIT uses the zygote process to create the shared memory space it needs during the zygoteÔÇÖs
startup (i.e. file_descriptor = ashmem_create_region(name, size)). Every app process inherits the
resulting file descriptor when it is forked from zygote. Then the shared memory is mapped into
the app processÔÇÖ own virtual address space when that processÔÇÖ virtual machine is initialized (i.e.
shared_memory_address = mmap (file_descriptor, size, MAP_SHARED,...) ). Note that since (1) all the
app processes inherit the zygoteÔÇÖs address-space layout, (2) they all use the same startup sequence,
and (3) that process is deterministic, the shared memory area is mapped at the same virtual address
by each participating virtual machine. This ensures that pointers to shared memory are valid across
all processes. (Even in runtime systems which do not guarantee that the shared area is always
mapped to the same virtual address across processes, ShareJIT can still locate objects inside the

                     Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
124:6                               Xiaoran Xu, Keith Cooper, Jacob Brock, Yan Zhang, and Handong Ye

shared area through offsets between the base address of the shared area and the absolute address
of those objects.)

The Global JIT Cache: The global JIT cache consists of consecutive, equal-size JIT cache segments
owned by each app process.2 The management and access-control of each segment is as follows.
     ÔÇó The owner process of a JIT cache segment has access to store compiled code in the segment.
       Memory allocation for the code inside the segment obeys the original mechanism in ART.
     ÔÇó Once compiled code is written into the cache segment, neither the owner process nor any
       other process may modify the code.
     ÔÇó The owner process may remove some compiled code during garbage collection, but only
       when it is not in use by any process. Memory deallocation for the code inside this segment
       also obeys the original mechanism in ART.
     ÔÇó Non-owner processes only have the right to read and execute the code inside the segment.
   By assigning each cache segment an owner and restricting other processesÔÇÖ access rights, ShareJIT
carefully avoids the potential of read-write and write-write conflicts within the code cache; it also
reduces the risk of memory attacks from security exploits that have low-level access to memory.3
By reserving the memory allocation and deallocation mechanism of the original runtime system
inside each segment, ShareJIT minimizes the modification to the VM-layer memory management,
leading to strong portability.
   Theoretically, ShareJIT is able to declare as many cache segments in the global JIT cache as
necessary, because the memory mapping facility mmap supports demand paging. This means the
operating system copies a disk page into physical memory only if an attempt is made to access
it and that page is not already in memory. Thus, the use of physical memory is determined by
demand, rather than by the size of the backing file. But to be memory efficient, we set the maximum
number of cache segments as 64 in our implementation. After the number of app processes reaches
this maximum count, ShareJIT offers two options for a newly started process: (1) reclaim a cache
segment if its owner is dead (killed by the OS, e.g., Android low-memory killer [Google 2018f], or
killed by the user); (2) if no pre-occupied cache segment is freed, create traditional JIT cache in this
processÔÇÖs own private memory space, which does not communicate with the global JIT cache. Note
that we implemented a ÔÇťlazyÔÇŁ reclamation of a dead processÔÇÖs cache segment; another option is to
let a process broadcast its death signal and be reclaimed by ShareJIT in an ÔÇťeagerÔÇŁ style.

The Global Sharing Map: The global sharing map is the bridge from runtime methods in each
virtual machineÔÇÖs heap to the compiled code in the global JIT cache. Whenever a method m is hot
enough and JIT compiled in some process n, n is responsible for creating a hash node for m in the
global sharing map. The key of the node is the hash-identification of m and the value is the entry
2 The equal-size segment design simplifies parts of the ShareJIT implementation. Because the shared cache is file-backed,

demand-paged, and mapped into each appÔÇÖs virtual address space, the cost of enlarging the per-app segment size is minimal;
it only incurs a physical memory cost if the space is used. Thus, our approach is to choose a "large enough" per-app segment
size and avoid the complications and costs that would come with managing different per-app segment sizes.
3 The problem of an attacker spoofing a code-cache entry is difficult; the best solution will depend on assumptions about the

rest of the system. If the JIT is corrupted, then neither code cache policies nor implementation will prevent the attacker
from taking over the system. Thus, we assume that the JIT is uncorrupted and that only the JIT has write access to the code
cache. In this scenario, a hash key computed over the method bytecode should be sufficient to ensure a methodÔÇÖs validity.
(The hash key will be described in the next subsection.)
    If arbitrary code in the process can write into the code cache, then additional measures and additional computation
would be necessary to detect a corrupted native-code segment. For example, the JIT could compute a secondary key over the
native code and securely retain it in a map from hash key to secondary key. The JIT could, on demand from the prospective
sharer, recompute the seconday key and compare it to the value stored in its secure map. Such a scheme could provide an
added degree of detection and reassurance to the prospective sharer.


Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
ShareJIT: JIT Code Cache Sharing across Processes and Its Practical Implementation                               124:7




                                         Fig. 2. The Work-flow of ShareJIT


point of the compiled code of m in process nÔÇÖs cache segment. We define the hash-identification
of a method m as the hash code of mÔÇÖs method signature and byte-by-byte dex code.4 Section 2.3
proves the legitimacy of identifying functionally equivalent methods with such a hash-id, whether
the symbolic references used in the dex methods are statically linked or will be dynamically linked.
A hash node also contains an unsigned integer reference count of the processes that are using the
compiled code associated with this node. The reference count tells the garbage collector when the
methodÔÇÖs compiled code can be collected and freed. (See details in Section 3.4)
   The global JIT cache is divided into contiguous segments, each with a single writer, to simplify
both management and synchronization. This scheme does not work for the global sharing map.
Each process that uses the global sharing map needs the right to read and write it. Since Ashmem
does not have a serialization mechanism for a multitude of readers and writers in a concurrent
system, we use a semaphore to protect the global sharing map.

3.2   ShareJIT Workflow
Figure 2 shows the main workflow of ShareJIT. An Android appÔÇÖs lifetime starts with being installed,
being launched which will trigger zygote to fork a child process for it and initialize a runtime system
inside the process, and eventually being executed by the runtime system. When a method M from
the app A is invoked, ART will first check if M has corresponding compiled code as its execution
entry-point. A methodÔÇÖs entry-point could point to the JIT code cache area, the interpreter or null.
(It could also point to the native code area, but we omit the scenario of native code execution
in our discussion since itÔÇÖs irrelevant to the design and implementation of ShareJIT.) If M has
compiled code, ART will execute it directly from its entry-point; if not, ART will interpret it. After
the interpretation, MÔÇÖs hotness count will be incremented; and if M is already warm, which means

4 We use a 128-bit hash code value in our implementation. According to our experiments, large apps such as Facebook have

up to 106 methods in total, while small apps tend to have around 104 methods. Even if we have 1,000 the largest apps and
109 methods in one system, the hash collision possibility is as low as 10Ôłĺ21 , which is negligible.


                          Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
124:8                            Xiaoran Xu, Keith Cooper, Jacob Brock, Yan Zhang, and Handong Ye

a profile was created and associated with it, the profile will also be updated according to the
execution.
   Two thresholds govern the decisions in the ShareJIT workflow: the sharing threshold and the
hot threshold. The sharing threshold determines how hot a method must be before ShareJIT will
attempt to share it. The hot threshold determines how hot a method must be before ShareJIT will
attempt to compile it.
   These two thresholds divide the hotness count of some method m, HC(m), into five distinct
ranges.
  (1) HC(m) < sharinđ┤ threshold : A value of HC in this range triggers no immediate action.
  (2) HC(m) = sharinđ┤ threshold : When m reaches the sharing threshold, ShareJIT will create
      a sharing task for it and add that task to the JIT threadÔÇÖs task queue. When the JIT thread
      reaches this task, it will (a) compute the hash-identification for m, (b) check if the global
      sharing map has code for this hash-identification, (c) update mÔÇÖs code to use the compiled
      code if found, as well as incrementing the reference count of the corresponding hash node.
  (3) sharinđ┤ threshold < HC(m) < hot threshold : A value of HC in this range triggers no
      immediate action.
  (4) HC(m) = hot threshold : When m reaches the hot threshold, if m has not been shared with
      corresponding compiled code, ShareJIT (a) compiles the code for m in a shareable manner,
      (b) inserts it into the shared cache, (c) updates the local code in m to use the newly compiled
      code, and (d) adds a new hash node for m in the sharing map.
  (5) HC(m) > hot threshold : By the time a method reaches this range with its hotness count, it
      should have been shared with compiled code or compiled into the shared cache. If m reaches
      the OSR threshold (20,000), it triggers an OSR compilation, but the resulting code is not shared
      by ShareJIT because of its non-standard entry provisions. We do not discuss the details of
      OSR mechanism since it is not in our scope.
ShareJIT uses the same hot threshold as ARTÔÇÖs default JITÔÇöthat is, 10,000. Sections 4 and 5.4
explain how we set the sharing threshold. Section 3.3 describes some of the constraints placed on
compilation of globally shared code mentioned in range (4).

3.3     The Shareability of JIT Compiled Code
JIT compilers often generate more highly optimized code than ahead-of-time (AOT) compilers do
because JIT compilers have extra runtime context. But overuse of such runtime context can make the
code unsharable across processes. For example, replacing symbolic references in method invocation
instructions (i.e. invoke-direct instruction in dex bytecode) with the absolute addresses of callee
methods can reduce function call overhead. (This transformation happens as part of method
devirtualization driven by class-hierarchy analysis.) Unfortunately, embedding absolute addresses
makes the code unsharable because the method bytecode is located in the class-data area and
is likely to be at different locations in different processes. Thus, ShareJIT disables such usage of
process-specific runtime context. The alternative would be to require that ShareJIT translates a
private pointer in one VM to the corresponding address in another VM, which is impractical.
   Another optimization that poses problems for ShareJIT is inline substitution. As discussed in
Section 2.3, ShareJIT only needs to ensure the symbolic references two dex methods use are literally
identical to determine that sharing compiled code between them is legal, while it can ignore
the content that those symbolic methods reference. However, inlining a callee method means
dereferencing the pointer in an invocation instruction, and replacing it with the actual method

Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
ShareJIT: JIT Code Cache Sharing across Processes and Its Practical Implementation                                     124:9

code.5 So to share code that has been inlined, ShareJIT needs to ensure that all of the code in the
inlined section is identical in both ÔÇťsharerÔÇŁ process and ÔÇťshareeÔÇŁ process. Specifically, ShareJIT
could record a list of the inlined callee methods, and check that each pair of callee method in
the ÔÇťsharerÔÇŁ process and the ÔÇťshareeÔÇŁ process are also functionally equivalent. This mechanism
would require extra space and time to compute and store the hash-identifications of callee methods;
it would significantly increase the overhead of sharing, particularly when inlining is performed
recursively, i.e. ART JIT compiler allows an inlined callee method to inline its own callee, up to
3-level depth.
   Because of this overhead, the current ShareJIT implementation only inlines built-in methodsÔÇö
methods that are defined in the classes preloaded by the zygote process during its initialization.
It does not inline app-specific methodsÔÇömethods defined in appÔÇÖs .dex files. This restriction
guarantees that if a callee is inlined, its definitions in both the ÔÇťsharerÔÇŁ and the ÔÇťshareeÔÇŁ runtime
system are identical; they are the same implementation inherited from their common super-process:
the zygote.
   ShareJIT sacrifices some potential performance gain from inlining. It could inline more callee
methods at the cost of a decrease in the shareability of compiled code. We discuss how this reduction
in inlining affects the overall performance of ShareJIT in Section 5.5.

3.4    Garbage Collection
As described in Section 2.2, garbage collection occurs in two modes: partial collection removes non-
entrant code and increases both code and data cache capacity equally; full collection additionally
removes the profile information of methods which are warm but not yet hot, along with code that
has not been executed since the last partial collection. Non-entrant code are the compiled code
that has been discarded for various reasons, the most frequent of which is deoptimization from
aggressively compiled code, e.g. bounds check elimination, dynamic type assertion, inline caching,
etc. JIT compilers could try these optimizations not only because they could gather more profile
information of the input method, but also because they could afford possible deoptimizations if such
too-aggressive optimization attempts end up failing during the subsequent method executionsÔÇôit
just switches back to the interpreter and let the garbage collector free the discarded code.
   Unlike those optimizations described in Section 3.3 that have to be disabled or restricted in
ShareJIT for shareability, these aggressive optimizations could be reserved in ShareJIT with proper
modification of the garbage collector. We will use inline caching as an example to explain how these
optimizations are compiled, when the deoptimization would be triggered, and how the garbage
collector should deal with the concomitant discarded compiled code in a global sharing JIT cache.
   Inline caching [Deutsch and Schiffman 1984] is an optimization technique to speed up runtime
method binding. It remembers the results of previous virtual method lookups ÔÇťinlineÔÇŁ, i.e. directly at
the call site. Those results are called ÔÇťinline cachesÔÇŁ. The concept relies on the empirical observation
that the objects that occur at a particular call site are often of the same type. ART collects inline
caches for every virtual callee method invocation in a caller method, and stores them in the JIT data
cache as ÔÇťprofile informationÔÇŁ for this caller method. The JIT compiler will perform this optimization
when an inline cache is monomorphic or polymorphic [H├Âlzle et al. 1991] during compilation,
and also emit a backup ÔÇťslow-pathÔÇŁ which leads to a normal unoptimized/safe execution flow. If
the ÔÇťslow-pathÔÇŁ is executed, which means the type assertion optimization fails, a concomitant
deoptimization exception will be thrown to the runtime system afterwards.


5 In the ART JIT compiler, it inlines the intermediate representation (control flow graph) and then translates the two methods

together.


                           Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
124:10                              Xiaoran Xu, Keith Cooper, Jacob Brock, Yan Zhang, and Handong Ye

   The handler for deoptimization exceptions invalidates and discards the offending compiled code.
It resets the hotness count of that method to zero. If the method becomes hot again in the future, a
new version of compiled code will be generated. If this situation occurs soon enough, i.e., before
the next collection can free the older version, (this situation arises often in practice,) the original
JIT would simply use the newly compiled version and let the garbage collector free the old version
because the old version is discarded by itself; however, ShareJIT must decide which version to keep
in the global sharing map from a global perspective.
   To deal with this situation, we introduce the first rule for the ShareJIT garbage collector: ÔÇťNewer is
better.ÔÇŁ Because the newer compiled code results from richer and more precise execution information,
ShareJIT always overwrites the old version in the global sharing map with the new one. To prevent
ÔÇťshareeÔÇŁ processes from executing the discarded old code, a validity check is put before any compiled
code is executed as shown in Figure 2.6 Another way to cope with discarded compiled code is to
broadcast its invalidation, which allows the ÔÇťshareeÔÇŁ processes to proactively delete that entry
point. In either approach, the garbage collector can safely collect and free the old code.
   We use inline caching as an example to introduce why and how the ShareJIT garbage collector
should behave differently, not only because itÔÇÖs one of the common deoptimizations, but also
because inline caches are part of the method profile information that is stored in the JIT data cache.
(The runtime system starts to collect profile information for a method when it becomes ÔÇťwarmÔÇŁ.)
From the description of inline caches above, we could see that once a sharing relationship is built,
the ÔÇťshareeÔÇŁ methodÔÇÖs profile becomes useless since it was intended to help in the JIT compilation
but the ÔÇťshareeÔÇŁ method will simply not be compiled.7 So the garbage collector could free the
profiles of all ÔÇťshareeÔÇŁ methods during a full collection. Thus, a ÔÇťshareeÔÇŁ method has no associated
memory in the JIT cache at allÔÇöcompiled code and stack maps are never created, while the profile
is deleted. (Note that the JIT data cache consists of two partsÔÇömethod profiles and stack maps,
while JIT code cache only contains compiled code, so ShareJIT saves more data cache than code
cache, which will be demonstrated in Section 5.5.)
   The second rule for the collector is ÔÇťOnly collect compiled code that is not being used by any
processÔÇŁ. Recall that each hash node in the global sharing map has a reference count which records
the number of ÔÇťshareeÔÇŁ processes for this node. The garbage collector will only collect and free
the compiled code that has a reference count of 0. This policy might reduce the amount of code
ShareJIT would collect compared with the default JIT, but itÔÇÖs beneficial to the performance.
   Detailed pseudo code is shown in Algorithm 1. The variable own_method_map holds the methods
whose compiled code are stored in a processÔÇÖs own cache segment, while sharee_method_map
holds the methods whose compiled code is shared from other processesÔÇÖ cache segments. Traverse
the own_method_map, if some compiled code c is not its corresponding method mÔÇÖs entry point,
and the reference count of m in the global sharing map is 0, delete it in the own_method_map,
and also delete it in the global sharing map; traverse the sharee_method_map, if some compiled
code c is not its corresponding method mÔÇÖs entry point, delete it in the sharee_method_map and
decrement the reference count of m in the global sharing map. Note that for a method m in the
sharee_method_map, even if its reference count RC(m) becomes zero after being decremented, the
collector is not allowed to delete the node in the global sharing map or to free the compiled code c,
because ShareJIT only grants the owner process the privilege to allocate/deallocate memories in its
cache segment.

6 Another scenario where a process might attempt to access invalid compiled code is when the process which produced the

compiled code died and its cache segment was reclaimed.
7 If a ÔÇťshareeÔÇŁ method deoptimizes from running the compiled code and subsequently becomes warm again, which happens

infrequently, the method can re-collect the profile information while it is getting hot.


Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
ShareJIT: JIT Code Cache Sharing across Processes and Its Practical Implementation                       124:11

ALGORITHM 1: Checking Method Entry Points in a Partial or Full Garbage Collection

for every pair (compiled code c, method m) in own_method_map do
    if c is not mÔÇÖs entry point and RC(m) == 0 then
         delete (c, m) in own_method_map;
         delete m in global_sharing_map;
         free c;
    end
end
for every pair (compiled code c, method m) in sharee_method_map do
    if c is not mÔÇÖs entry point then
         delete (c, m) in sharee_method_map;
         decrement RC(m) in global_sharing_map;
    end
end



4     UNDERSTANDING THE COSTS OF SHAREJIT ENABLED EXECUTION
ShareJIT introduces complex behavior that affects the runtime performance of apps. To understand
that behavior, it helps to consider three different perspectives on how the shared global JIT cache
affects performance and memory utilization, as described in the following three subsections. In
each case, the performance improvement is difficult to predict or model because it depends in a
detailed way on both the future behavior of each process and on the overlap between processes.

4.1    Single-Process Performance
From the perspective of a single executing app, ShareJIT has three direct effects.
    (1) Once a method m has been invoked sharing threshold (ST) times, the process executing the app
        checks to see if m has corresponding compiled code in the global shared cache. Specifically,
        the running process computes a global hash-identification for m, and checks in the global
        sharing map for an instance of that hash-identification.
    (2) If the running process discovers a shared, compiled copy of m, it links the runtime systemÔÇÖs
        call to the shared, compiled implementation, and updates the reference count of m in the
        global sharing map.
    (3) If the lookup fails to find a shared, compiled copy of m, the running process continues to
        interpret m until HC(m) reaches the hot threshold (HT). At that point, the executing process
        schedules a JIT compilation of m.
Each of these actions has a cost. From the single-process perspective, the search for a shared,
compiled copy of m is an added cost. But if the search finds a copy of m in the shared global cache,
the cost pays off, because the running process begins to execute compiled code earlier than it would
with the standard Android JIT, and additionally avoids the cost of JIT-compiling m.
   Defining ÔłćT (m) as the reduction in execution time from running the compiled version of m
rather than the interpreted version, then it should save at most ÔłćT (m)(HT - ST) time. Because
the standard JIT would have interpreted m until HC(m) Ôëą HT while ShareJIT started executing
compiled code when HC(m) Ôëą ST . Once HC(m) exceeds HT , the runtime cost of executing m
approximates the cost that would occur with the standard Android JIT. We say it approximates
the cost because ShareJIT restricts optimizations in the shared compiled code in a way that the
standard JIT does not.

                      Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
124:12                           Xiaoran Xu, Keith Cooper, Jacob Brock, Yan Zhang, and Handong Ye

  Thus, the factors in ShareJIT execution that may slow the app are limited:
  (1) the cost of computing the global hash-identification for a method m, defined as H (m),
  (2) the cost of checking the global sharing map for m, defined as L(m),
  (3) the cost of linking the call site to the shared, compiled copy of m,
  (4) the cost of updating the reference count for m in the global sharing map,
  (5) and any lost efficiency from restricted optimization.
Of these costs, the first two are the most significant because they are incurred every time some
method crosses the sharing threshold and does a lookup in the global sharing map. While the cost
is trivial for a single method, in aggregate, it occurs many times. Items (3) and (4) only occur if
that lookup succeeds: a much smaller number. The lost efficiency from restricted optimizations is a
default costÔÇöthe sum of all JIT compiled methodsÔÇÖ performance degrading, which is not correlated
with the sharing attempt.
   Note that in the implementation of ShareJIT in Android, the cost of computing method hash-
identifications is paid at runtime. For other virtual machines in which the runtime representation
of class data including bytecode is immutable, such as a standard JVM, method hash-identifications
could be generated at compile time and stored in .class files. One drawback of this approach
is that it consumes extra runtime space after these .class files being loaded. ShareJIT allows
an implementation flexibility as to trading-off between time cost and space cost at runtime for
identifying methods globally. In ART, computing method hash-identifications at runtime is the
only choice as explained in Section 2.3. Besides, Android devices are already suffering from an
increasing memory pressure.
   On the other hand, ShareJIT has two major sources of improvement: avoiding the cost of JIT-
compiling the method m and the savings from additional compiled executions up to (HT Ôłĺ ST )
times. As might be expected, the total number of executions of m in the app determine the expected
improvement. Assume that m already exists in the shared code cache. If HC(m) stops at (ST + 1),
then the impact will be negligible. As HC(m) grows from ST to HT, the savings from executing
compiled code will increase. Once HC(m) exceeds HT, the savings from executing compiled code
stop, and the only additional improvement comes from the fact that ShareJIT avoided the cost of
JIT-compiling m.

4.2   System-Wide Performance
From the perspective of the overall system, ShareJIT will fundamentally change the relationship
between the amount of time spent JIT-compiling code and the number of method invocations. With
ShareJIT, a single compile step can improve the performance of multiple processes and multiple
apps. With ShareJIT, a single app can begin executing compiled code at an earlier point in its
progress than it would with the standard Android JITÔÇöearlier by (HT - ST ) method invocations.
  The impact of this effect depends, heavily, on how invalidations in the global cache are handled.
The benefit from cross-processes sharing depends on the compiled code remaining in the shared
cache. As explained in Section 3.1, the current implementation keeps a processÔÇÖs image in the
shared cache intact until it must be reclaimed. That is, if process p compiled and cached method m
and, subsequently, exited, pÔÇÖs copy of the compiled code for m will remain in the shared cache until
some newly spawned process needs a segment and pÔÇÖs segment is the next segment to be reclaimed.
This policy maximizes the residency of shared code in the cache and increases the impact of the
shared cache on overall performance. Although recompilation resulted from deoptimization also
causes shared cache invalidation and update, it happens infrequently on shared code in practice,
and sharing relationship can be rebuilt again with the recompiled code quickly.

Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
ShareJIT: JIT Code Cache Sharing across Processes and Its Practical Implementation                       124:13

   To summarize the analysis above, we could build a cost model for executing a method m as: (in
terms of the difference between ShareJIT and default JIT)
             ´ú▒
             ´ú┤
             ´ú┤ 0,                                                if HC(m) < ST
      F (m) = ÔłĺH (m) Ôłĺ L(m) + S(m)ÔłćT (m)(HC(m) Ôłĺ ST ),
             ´ú▓
             ´ú┤
                                                                 if ST ÔëĄ HC(m) < HT                          (1)
             ´ú┤ ÔłĺH (m) Ôłĺ L(m) + S(m)ÔłćT (m)(HT Ôłĺ ST ) + S(m)J (m), if HC(m) Ôëą HT
             ´ú┤
             ´ú┤
             ´ú│
where H (m), L(m), ÔłćT (m), HC(m), ST and HT have been defined before; S(m) returns a binary
value 1 or 0 depending on whether the lookup in the shared global cache for m succeeds or not; J (m)
is the JIT compilation cost for m. (To simplify, we ignore the difference in J (m) between ShareJIT
and default JIT.) Then F (m) would be the ultimate performance improvement for m we could gain
from ShareJIT, compared with default JIT.
   ÔłćT (m), the speedup from executing the compiled code of m versus interpreting m, is computable
at runtime, although we didnÔÇÖt implement the calculation. Given T i(m), time cost of interpreting
m, and Tc(m), time cost of running the current version of compiled code of m, then obviously
ÔłćT (m) = T i(m) Ôłĺ Tc(m). T i(m) and Tc(m) could be recorded during the execution of m.
   However, the final hotness of a method, HC(m), is unknowable. We cannot precisely predict how
many times a method m will be invoked in the future. We cannot predict if the compiled code will
become invalid due to the recompilation of m or the reclamation of the ÔÇťsharerÔÇŁ cache segment,
either. So we are not able to analyze the performance gain from Equation 1 through mathematical
modeling. Then when is the best time to share?
   The similar problem motivated all the studies for JIT compilation policy in academic historyÔÇö
ÔÇťwhen is the best time to JIT compile a hot method?ÔÇŁ The mainstream of JIT compilation policy in
industry is using a hotness threshold or a method invocation threshold, e.g. ART, HotSpot JVM
server compiler [Paleczny et al. 2001], and IBM JIT compiler [Suganuma et al. 2000]; methods whose
hotness counts or invocation counts reach the threshold will get compiled at runtime. It is both
easy-to-implement and efficient. Applying that heuristic on sharing policy, we assumed a single
sharing threshold ST of method hotness, at which ShareJIT attempts to share, in the workflow
of ShareJIT and the analysis above. The total system performance improvement ShareJIT gains
compared with default JIT are:
                                         ├Ľ               ├Ľ            ├Ľ
                             Y (ST ) =       F (m) = Ôłĺ       C(m) +       G(m)                               (2)
                                    H C(m)ÔëąST       H C(m)ÔëąST     HC(m)ÔëąST
where C(m) is simplified for H (m)+L(m), and G(m) is simplified for the positive terms in Equation 1,
despite of the value of HC(m). We can see that the major tradeoff comes from the warming
methods, those with ST ÔëĄ HC(m) < HT . For these warming methods, the benefit is the sum of
inevitable increased cost from checking more methods and potential increased gains from sharing
methods earlier and sharing more methods, as ST decreases. The key to maximizing total benefit is
to find the best sharing threshold ST for this term, given as Y (ST ) above. Section 5.4 describes our
experiment to find this value.

4.3 System-Wide Memory Utilization
From the perspective of system-wide memory utilization, the effect of ShareJIT is conceptually
simple. ShareJIT reduces system-wide memory use for compiled-code in proportion to the amount
of sharing and the size of those methods. In practice, we can measure total memory use for compiled
code with the standard Android JIT and with ShareJIT and subtract. To make predictions, however,
is difficult because the actual savings depend on how different apps overlap in time and how the
eviction policy for the shared cache works.

                      Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
124:14                           Xiaoran Xu, Keith Cooper, Jacob Brock, Yan Zhang, and Handong Ye

  In practice, we measured this effect and found that ShareJIT reduced overall JIT cache use by
roughly 16%. (see Section 5 for more discussion)

5     EXPERIMENTS
5.1    Benchmarks
To evaluate the performance of ShareJIT compared with the default JIT, we chose 8 widely used
apps as benchmarks: Airbnb, Amazon, Chrome, Facebook, Firefox, Instagram, Googlemaps, Skype.
The specific version and release date information are listed in table 1. They were chosen for three
primary reasons:
    ÔÇó They are all mass-market apps in real life; (Except for Firefox. Firefox was chosen because itÔÇÖs
      in the same category with ChromeÔÇôthey are both web browsers, and we would like to see if
      apps in the same category tend to share more code in common.)
      ÔÇó They all have easy-to-use graphical interfaces which can be automated by our scripts to
        imitate the real usersÔÇÖ activities;
      ÔÇó They all have reasonable number of JIT events during run time. (Games are also heavily
        downloaded, but they are often AOT compiled to a specific ISA, and do not involve JIT
        compilation at all.)

5.2    Experimental Setup and Steps
The experiments were running a Google Pixel 32GB smartphone. It has a Qualcomm Snapdragon
 821 64-bit quad-core processor, which implements the ARM big.LITTLE architecture. Two of the
 four cores have frequency scaling from 0.31 GHz - 1.59 GHz, and the other two scale from 0.31 GHz
- 2.15 GHz. We measured the CPU cycles used by each process as the metric to evaluate ShareJITÔÇÖs
 and default JITÔÇÖs performance. Since this metric is sensitive to thread-core configuration and to
 frequency scaling, we disabled the two ÔÇťlittleÔÇŁ cores and pinned the two big cores to 1.5 GHz prior
 to each experiment, in order to make our experimental results repeatable and reproducible.
    Each app was run by an automated script, instead of a human operator. The scripts are written
with Android ADB shell input commands8 , which could send events like clicking, swiping, and
 typing text to the device, simulating a real userÔÇÖs activities on a certain app. Because Airbnb detects
 and prevents robot login, we needed to input a user name and a password manually. In all other
8 See details about ADB shell input commands at www.raizlabs.com/dev/2017/09/automating-input-events-android/




                                      Table 1. Apps Used in Experiments

                           APK                Version                  Release Date
                           Airbnb             17.50                    Dec. 16, 2017
                           Amazon             12.7.0.100               Aug. 28, 2017
                           Chrome             57.0.2987.97             March 9, 2017
                           Facebook           100.0.0.20.70            Oct. 18, 2016
                           Firefox            52.0-2015474475          March 3, 2017
                           Instagram          10.25.0-60813718         June 9, 2017
                           Googlemaps         9.61.1-961102122         Sep. 12, 2017
                           Skype              8.12.0.14                Dec 11, 2017

Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
ShareJIT: JIT Code Cache Sharing across Processes and Its Practical Implementation                      124:15

apps, the launch, execution, and data collection were entirely automated. We used automated
scripts to eliminate the data deviation that might be caused by human operators, and to maximize
the repeatability of the experiments.
   We also randomized the order of running apps in each experiment. Because in a sharing re-
lationship, the sharer is always the app used earlier and the sharee is always the app used later,
the experimental results for one app depend on the order in which all the apps run. Thus, we
randomized the apps running order in each experimental run to amortize the potential result bias
that might be caused by any fixed ordering of the apps.
   The length of each appÔÇÖs running time ranged from 2 to 5 minutes, depending on the function-
alities of the app and what was possible to do from the perspective of a real user. For example,
the script for Chrome launches the app, inputs a keyword at Google search bar, then browses the
items and images for 2 minutes; the script for Facebook launches the app, inputs a user name and a
password to login, browses the news feed, and browses the market items around the userÔÇÖs location
for a total of 5 minutes. The amount of work in the script for the same app is consistent across
multiple runs.
   Each experimental run was performed in the following steps:
  (1) flashing the experimental device, a Google Pixel Phone, with either the default Android OS
      Image, or the ShareJIT Android OS Image;
  (2) installing all 8 benchmark apps;
  (3) running the 8 automated scripts in a random order;
  (4) dumping and collecting the data.
   The data produced by the experimental runs was, on a per-process basis: compilation time for
all the JIT compiled methods, CPU cycles used by the app processes, JIT code cache size and data
cache size which includes runtime methods profile information, and stack maps as we mentioned.
The JIT compilation time, compiled code size and data size of a method are logged at runtime
through the Android Logcat tool[Google 2018e]; the CPU cycles are read from the /proc/pid/stat
file, which provides status information about the process identified by pid. From the /proc/pid/stat
data, we extracted both user mode and kernel mode cycles consumed by each process. We believe
this number, representing the time resources spent by a process, is an accurate and precise metric
to compare the performance between ShareJIT and default JIT .

5.3   Data Noise
During the experiments, there existed several inevitable sources of data noise. One is some content
provider apps served different content from one run to another. For example, Facebook and Instagram
had different posts in each run. And it was impossible to control the content being served in any
app or any run. Another source is the inconsistency of the quality/speed of the WiFi network and
appsÔÇÖ servers. This effect stands out when there are automatically played videos in an appÔÇÖs content.
Higher WiFi network speed or server responding speed brings shorter loading delay of a video
before its automatic playing, which leads to more data transfer and communication between an
app and its server. To eliminate these noises, we conducted 30 experiments (15 pairs) and took
averages; we ran default JIT and ShareJIT alternately and consecutively to minimize the effect of
environmental and app-content changes.

5.4   Sharing Threshold
As we mentioned in Section 4, the benefit of sharing the compiled code for a method is unpredictable
because the number of future invocations of a given method is unknowable. So we performed an

                     Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
124:16                           Xiaoran Xu, Keith Cooper, Jacob Brock, Yan Zhang, and Handong Ye




Fig. 3. Savings in CPU Cycles, Compilation Time and JIT Cache Size (including both code cache and data
cache), compared with default JIT in ART, as a function of different sharing threshold values




empirical study to discover the threshold where, in practice, sharing compiled code gains the most
performance improvement.
   As mentioned in Section 2.2, the threshold for JIT compilation in ART is a hotness count of
10, 000 for a method. At a count of 10, 000, its own JIT compiler will compile it. Thus, the sharing
threshold must be lower than 10, 000. Therefore, we divided the range from 1 to 10, 000 equally
and tested the thresholds at 1, 1,000, 2,000, 3,000, . . . , 10,000. For each tested threshold, we ran the
experiment following the procedure described in Section 5.2. Figure 3 shows the results. The x axis
shows different thresholds at which a sharing task is created for a method. The y axis shows the
percentage of savings on compilation time, JIT cache size and CPU cycles, compared with default
ART. The values of the data points in this figure are the average results of all 8 apps.
   From this figure, we can see that the compilation time is not significantly statistically correlated
with the sharing threshold; all of the compilation time savings fluctuate slightly between 35% to
37%. Both cache size and CPU cycles show a peak at a threshold of 5, 000. It appears that, for CPU
cycles, as the threshold ST├Ź increases and the number         of methods which qualify for HC(m) Ôëą ST
decreases, both the cost C(m) and the benefit G(m) in equation 2 decrease; but on the left of
                                                    ├Ź
the peak, the cost decreases faster, while on the right, the benefit decreases faster.
   For the JIT cache size, it is tempting to think the increased sharing leads to increased code
space savings. In truth, however, final code space saving depends on the total number of methods
compiled and shared. The value of ST only affects cache size if it changes the set of methods that
are ultimately compiled. If a methodÔÇÖs hotness count stays in between the sharing threshold and
the hot threshold, it will not get compiled when run with either the default system or ShareJIT. If
it does not get compiled in either, then ShareJIT shows no space savings. We cannot resolve this
problem satisfactorily using arithmetic because the appÔÇÖs behavior is unpredictable. Nevertheless,
the empirical study gives us an answerÔÇöthe best sharing threshold appears to be 5, 000. And the

Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
ShareJIT: JIT Code Cache Sharing across Processes and Its Practical Implementation                       124:17

experimental results depicted in the next section are generated with the sharing threshold set to
5, 000.

5.5   Results and Discussion
The results we show in this section are the average values of all 15 pairs of experiments. If an app
consists of multiple processes, e.g., Chrome created as many as 6 processes including the main
process com.chrome, the sandbox processes such as com.chrome:sandboxed_process0 and the
privilege processes such as com.chrome:privileged_process0, etc., the results include the data
from all its processes.
   Table 2 lists all the detailed numbers of our experimental results. ShareJIT reduces the total JIT
code cache by an average of 12.7% and the total JIT data cache by an average of 19.7%. Together,
ShareJIT reduces the total JIT cache by an average of 16.4%. From another perspective, ShareJIT
saves about 1.9MB space across all 8 apps in an average total running time of 32.5 minutes. ShareJIT
consumes about 300 KB space for the global sharing map in an entire experimental run.
   Figure 4 compares the end-of-experiment JIT cache sizes of each app between default JIT and
ShareJIT. More specifically, the left panel of Figure 4 shows that for every app, ShareJIT decreases
the JIT code cache size. The maximum average decrease is in Facebook, where ShareJIT reduces the
code cache size by an average of 22.7% (303.9 KB). The right panel of Figure 4 demonstrates that
for JIT data cache, every app also shows reduction by running ShareJIT. The maximum average
decrease is still in FacebookÔÇö26.9% (410.5 KB). The results of other apps are listed in Table 2.
   As we mentioned in Section 5.2, we measured the CPU cycles used by each process to represent
ShareJITÔÇÖs and default JITÔÇÖs performance. The left panel of Figure 5 shows the number of CPU
cycles used by each app, including both kernel mode and user mode CPU cycles, per second of run.
In order to eliminate the effect of different experimental times of different apps, we display the
cycles of per second of run instead of the whole run. Thus the computation of the average speedup
across all apps is meaningful. From this figure, we could see ShareJIT improves the performance
of every app. The maximum speedup percentage appears in AmazonÔÇöan average of 21.9%. The
average speedup across all apps per second of run is 9.0%.


Table 2. Code space saving and performance improvements due to ShareJIT compared with default JIT. The
bottom row shows average total reductions across all 8 apps.

                      JIT Cache Reduction (%)              CPU Cycles           Compilation Time
      App             Code       Data        Total        Reduction (%)             Reduction (%)
      Airbnb           10.3       17.7        14.2                1.5                     28.5
      Amazon             9.9      20.1        15.2               21.9                     19.1
      Chrome             8.0      11.8        10.0                3.2                     21.4
      Facebook         22.7       26.9        24.9               13.9                     57.3
      Firefox            3.3       8.4          6.0               3.9                     20.1
      Googlemaps         9.8      17.3        13.6                1.6                     30.7
      Instagram          9.2      19.7        14.8               15.5                     39.8
      Skype            11.3       18.9        15.0                1.7                     25.7
      Average          12.7       19.7        16.4                9.0                     37.0


                      Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
124:18                           Xiaoran Xu, Keith Cooper, Jacob Brock, Yan Zhang, and Handong Ye




Fig. 4. Average end-of-experiment JIT code cache and data cache sizes for each app over all experiments
using default JIT and ShareJIT. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals.




Fig. 5. Average app used CPU cycles per second of run and average total compilation time of JIT compiled
methods for each app over all experiments using default JIT and ShareJIT. Error bars show 95% confidence
intervals.



   The right panel of Figure 5 illustrates the total compilation time of JIT compiled methods during
run time. It is consumed and logged by the JIT compiler thread in ART. ShareJIT reduces the
compilation time of each app. The average total compilation time reduction is 37.0%. And the
maximum total compilation time reduction appears, again, in FacebookÔÇöan average of 57.3% (saving
3.7 seconds for a whole run).
   Recall that in Section 4.3, weÔÇÖve discussed that theoretically, the system-wide memory utilization
of ShareJIT is in proportion to the amount of sharing and the size of those methods. However,
in practical experiments, the end-of-experiment JIT cache size of each app we measured was
actually resulted from a combination of several factors. (ÔÇś-ÔÇŁ indicates this factor reduces the end-of-
experiment cache sizes while ÔÇť+ÔÇŁ factors increase them.)
     - ShareJIT eliminates the duplicate copies of compiled code for the same methods existing
       across apps;
     - Restricted optimizations, e.g. less inline substitution, could reduce the size of a methodÔÇÖs
       compiled code;

Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
ShareJIT: JIT Code Cache Sharing across Processes and Its Practical Implementation                        124:19




                         (a)                                                       (b)




                         (c)                                                       (d)

Fig. 6. A scatter plot to show the growth curve of JIT cache size of example apps during a whole experiment
run. X axis is the count of JIT compiled methods, and y axis is the corresponding JIT data and cache size.
Figure (a)(b)(c)(d) respectively show the growth curve of Facebook, Firefox, Instagram and Skype.


     + A ShareJIT garbage collector only collects the compiled code that is not currently being used
       by any process, so it may delay the collection of shared compiled code, leading to a temporary
       cache size increase;
     + Given a fixed time frame, ShareJIT could complete more compilation tasks in the JIT thread
       task queue because each task costs less time compared with default JIT. And more compilations
       can clearly cause an increase in the end-of-experiment cache size.
   Figure 6 shows the example growth curves of JIT cache sizes during a whole experiment run for
4 apps. In sub-figure (a)(c)(d) which demonstrates the cache size growth of Facebook, Instagram and
Skype, the ShareJIT curve (the red one) is consistently below the default JIT curve (the blue one). It
is resulted from a combination of both restricted optimization and elimination of duplicate compiled
code. All of the four figures also show that ShareJIT compiled more methods than the default JIT
did in a given time frame. For example, in Skype, default JIT compiled about 1,100 methods while
ShareJIT compiled about 1,500 methods (in a 235 seconds of running). Overall, ShareJIT manages
to reduce the JIT cache size by an average of 16.4%.

6   RELATED WORK
The earliest related work we found with regard to code sharing at runtime is Dillenberger et al.
[2000]ÔÇöan implementation of the JVM for OS/390. In this work, multiple JVMs could share class
data, constant pools, etc, which are stored in a shared heap during class loading, linking and

                       Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
124:20                           Xiaoran Xu, Keith Cooper, Jacob Brock, Yan Zhang, and Handong Ye

verification, while the compiled code is not shared. The authors briefly discussed these ideas at a
high level without evaluating the actual performance of the system.
   Czajkowski et al. [2002] described two systemsÔÇöone allows the sharing of class meta-data,
including bytecodes, among virtual machines, and the other additionally allows the sharing of
dynamically compiled code. Both systems were implemented as modifications to the HotSpot JVM
client compiler [Kotzmann et al. 2008]. The first one is similar to Dillenberger et al. [2000]. It
divides the heap area into a shared part, a private part and an extra indirection part. Objects in
the shared area have to reference objects in the private area via an entry in the indirection table.
Each indirection holds the virtual address of the object associated with it, which can be different
for each process. The second system uses these mechanisms to share compiled code with little
modifications in JIT compilation, e.g. static variables access. Czajkowski et al. pointed out that their
systems are less robust/secure because of the use of shared heap.
   After Czajkowski et al.ÔÇÖs work, a variety of similar projects have addressed sharing class meta-
data, class loaders, and other runtime representations in the JVM [Back et al. 2000; Berry et al.
2004; Bhattacharya et al. 2017; Daynes and Czajkowski 2005; Kawachiya et al. 2007; Kuck et al.
2009; Landau et al. 2011; Schmidt et al. 2008; Wintergerst 2008; Wong et al. 2003]. Some of them
implemented multi-tasking VMs to share runtime memories [Czajkowski and Dayn├ás 2012; Cza-
jkowski et al. 2003; Yan et al. 2016]. In addition, Oracle [Oracle 2018] and IBM [IBM 2018] also
have production Java execution environments, which enable the sharing of class data, e.g., Java
class bytecode and class file metadata, across JVMs. The sharing of class data requires significant
modification to the virtual-machine-layer memory-layout, which couples the implementation
tightly to a specific runtime system. In particular, for runtime systems like ART, which have a
different class file format than the Java standard (one .dex file contains almost all the classes of an
app, and symbolic references are globally unique and mutable during runtime), sharing class data
would add too much overhead and, thus, be impractical.
   Studies of code sharing across processes have been expanded to persistent code caches [Bruening
and Kiriansky 2008; Guckert et al. 2013]ÔÇöan effective way to reduce the overhead of dynamic
binary translation, which translates binary code from one instruction set architecture to another at
runtime, and is often used in system virtualization, system debugging, system security and whole
program analysis. These projects have an orthogonal focus to our projectÔÇÖs focus.
   Huang et al. [2010] did work that is similar to our work. They proposed a native-code sharing
mechanism across Dalvik virtual machines [Ehringer 2010] on Android 2.1, by storing all the
compiled code in a shared file and implementing a daemon process to control the sharing. By
contrast, ShareJIT composes a global shared cache and allows each process to manage its own
cache segment instead of using a centralized agent. Since Android 5, the Dalvik VM was replaced
by ART, and, in Android 2.1, the dex code of apps was only interpreted before being JIT compiled.
By contrast, Android 7 uses a combination of interpretation, JIT compilation and AOT compilation
to execute dex code.
   Intuitively, Android 2.1 could offer more sharing opportunities than Android 7 does since ART
has already AOT compiled some shared libraries in the system after its first boot-up. In Android
2.1, the JIT compiler is more like a typical AOT compiler since it generates position independent
code with relocation information, while modern JIT compilers often leverage rich runtime context.
The experiment shown in Huang et al. [2010] is preliminaryÔÇöthey tested 10 simple, small-size
benchmarks instead of popular real-life apps with billions of downloads as we use; they measured
the system performance through a score given by a single benchmark app called Caffeinemark. In
contrast, we evaluate the performance of ShareJIT by measuring the CPU cycles used by full apps
which include both the time spent in executing app methods and the time spent in the runtime
system, e.g. compilation, garbage collection, etc.

Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
ShareJIT: JIT Code Cache Sharing across Processes and Its Practical Implementation                              124:21

7   CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The ShareJIT system provides a new framework for code caching and for sharing cached code across
multiple applications in an Android environment. The goal of ShareJIT is to eliminate repeated JIT
compilations of the same code and duplicate copies of the resulting compiled code, which occur
in existing systems because applications share library code while the runtime system maintains
process-private caches.
   ShareJIT provides a global shared cache created by composing the private cache segments and
providing coordinated, controlled access, lookup, and memory management across the full set
of caches. The design recognizes that there is a fundamental tradeoff between shareability and
optimization; the more optimized the compiled code is, the less shareable it is. ShareJIT increases
shareability by restraining the amount of runtime context used during JIT compilation. For example,
it limits the scope of inlining to increase sharing. Through ShareJIT, a single compile step can
improve the performance of multiple processes and multiple apps. With ShareJIT, a single app can
sometimes begin executing compiled code at an earlier point in its progress than it would be in the
standard runtime system. ShareJIT improves overall system performance while reducing the total
amount of memory devoted to caching compiled code and its associated data structures.
   We build a practical implementation of ShareJIT in the Android Runtime system, and provide
details of that implementation. We use this implementation to show that ShareJIT improves the
overall system performance by an average of 9%, and decreases the memory utilization by an
average of 16%. Additionally, ShareJIT also decreases the amount of time spent on JIT compilation
by an average of 37%.
   ShareJIT opens up opportunities for future work.
    ÔÇó There are a wide range of management policies to explore. For example, we intend to explore
      more deeply the relationship between the expected costs and benefits of sharing a method so
      that we could improve the decision making for when to share a method. E.g., an intuitive
      heuristic is that larger methods produce smaller payoff, because it costs more to compute
      their hash-identifications and they tend to exhibit less dramatic speedup from compiled
      execution.
    ÔÇó We also plan to experiment on some inter-process coordinations, e.g. maintaining a global
      sharing method hotness notion together, changing ownership of a method to a sharee process
      when the sharer/owner dies. Both create a better global perspective of runtime methods, but
      since they transfer information across the process boundary in Android, they also bring the
      overhead of inter-process communication and synchronization.
    ÔÇó We intend to port the Android implementation of ShareJIT to other open-source systems. In
      fact, ShareJIT was designed and implemented in an easy-to-port style, e.g., ShareJIT does not
      change the structure of the process-private code cache; it composes the original code cache
      segments together to form the global cache and gives each process execute access to the
      entire cache. This minimized changes to the memory management layer and the in-process
      JIT.
    ÔÇó Other subjects of possible interests include eviction and garbage collection policies, data
      mining ShareJITÔÇÖs behavior to identify methods that tend not to be shared and should, thus,
      be compiled for performance rather than shareability.

REFERENCES
Godmar Back, Wilson C Hsieh, and Jay Lepreau. 2000. Processes in KaffeOS: Isolation, resource management, and sharing in
  Java. In Proceedings of the 4th conference on Symposium on Operating System Design & Implementation-Volume 4. USENIX
  Association, 23.


                         Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
124:22                               Xiaoran Xu, Keith Cooper, Jacob Brock, Yan Zhang, and Handong Ye

Robert F Berry, Donna N Dillenberger, Elizabeth A Hutchison, Susan P Paice, Donald W Schmidt, and Alan M Webb. 2004.
   Class sharing between multiple virtual machines. (May 18 2004). US Patent 6,738,977.
Dev Bhattacharya, Kenneth B Kent, Eric Aubanel, Daniel Heidinga, Peter Shipton, and Aleksandar Micic. 2017. Improving
   the performance of JVM startup using the shared class cache. In Communications, Computers and Signal Processing
   (PACRIM), 2017 IEEE Pacific Rim Conference on. IEEE, 1ÔÇô6.
Jacob Brock, Chen Ding, Xiaoran Xu, and Yan Zhang. 2018. PAYJIT: space-optimal JIT compilation and its practical
   implementation. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Compiler Construction. ACM, 71ÔÇô81.
Derek Bruening and Vladimir Kiriansky. 2008. Process-shared and persistent code caches. In Proceedings of the fourth ACM
   SIGPLAN/SIGOPS international conference on Virtual execution environments. ACM, 61ÔÇô70.
Grzegorz Czajkowski and Laurent Dayn├ás. 2012. Multitasking without compromise: a virtual machine evolution. ACM
   SIGPLAN Notices 47, 4a (2012), 60ÔÇô73.
Grzegorz Czajkowski, Laurent Dayn├Ęs, and Nathaniel Nystrom. 2002. Code sharing among virtual machines. In European
   Conference on Object-Oriented Programming. Springer, 155ÔÇô177.
Grzegorz Czajkowski, Laurent Dayn├Ęs, and Ben L Titzer. 2003. A Multi-User Virtual Machine.. In USENIX Annual Technical
   Conference, General Track. 85ÔÇô98.
Laurent Daynes and Grzegorz Czajkowski. 2005. Sharing the runtime representation of classes across class loaders. In
   European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming. Springer, 97ÔÇô120.
L Peter Deutsch and Allan M Schiffman. 1984. Efficient implementation of the Smalltalk-80 system. In Proceedings of the
   11th ACM SIGACT-SIGPLAN symposium on Principles of programming languages. ACM, 297ÔÇô302.
Donna Dillenberger, Rajesh Bordawekar, Clarence W Clark III, Donald Durand, David Emmes, Osamu Gohda, Sally Howard,
   Michael F Oliver, Frank Samuel, and RW St John. 2000. Building a Java virtual machine for server applications: The JVM
   on OS/390. IBM Systems Journal 39, 1 (2000), 194ÔÇô210.
David Ehringer. 2010. The dalvik virtual machine architecture. (2010).
Google. 2018a. Android ÔÇô Android Oreo (Go edition). (2018). https://www.android.com/versions/oreo-8-0/go-edition/
Google. 2018b. Dex Bytecode | Android Open Source Project. (2018). https://source.android.com/devices/tech/dalvik/
   dalvik-bytecode
Google. 2018c. Dex File Format | Android Open Source Project. (2018). https://source.android.com/devices/tech/dalvik/
   dex-format
Google. 2018d. Enable Multidex for Apps with Over 64K Methods | Android Studio. (2018). https://developer.android.com/
   studio/build/multidex.html
Google. 2018e. Logcat | Android Studio. (2018). developer.android.com/studio/command-line/logcat.html
Google. 2018f. Low RAM Configuration | Android Open Source Project. (2018). https://source.android.com/devices/tech/
   perf/low-ram#lowmem
Lauren Guckert, Mike OÔÇÖConnor, S Kumar Ravindranath, Zhuoran Zhao, and V Janapa Reddi. 2013. A case for persistent
   caching of compiled javascript code in mobile web browsers. In Workshop on AMAS-BT.
Urs H├Âlzle, Craig Chambers, and David Ungar. 1991. Optimizing dynamically-typed object-oriented languages with
   polymorphic inline caches. In European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming. Springer, 21ÔÇô38.
Yao-Chih Huang, Yu-Sheng Chen, Wuu Yang, and Jean Jyh-Jiun Shann. 2010. File-based sharing for dynamically compiled
   code on Dalvik virtual machine. In Computer Symposium (ICS), 2010 International. IEEE, 489ÔÇô494.
IBM. 2018. Java Class data sharing between JVMs. (2018). https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/en/SSYKE2_7.1.
   0/com.ibm.java.lnx.71.doc/user/classdatasharing.html
Hiroshi Inoue, Hiroshige Hayashizaki, Peng Wu, and Toshio Nakatani. 2011. A Trace-based Java JIT Compiler Retrofitted
   from a Method-based Compiler. In Proceedings of the 9th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code Generation
   and Optimization (CGO ÔÇÖ11). IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, 246ÔÇô256. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=
   2190025.2190071
Kiyokuni Kawachiya, Kazunori Ogata, Daniel Silva, Tamiya Onodera, Hideaki Komatsu, and Toshio Nakatani. 2007. Cloneable
   JVM: a new approach to start isolated java applications faster. In Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on Virtual
   execution environments. ACM, 1ÔÇô11.
Thomas Kotzmann, Christian Wimmer, Hanspeter M├Âssenb├Âck, Thomas Rodriguez, Kenneth Russell, and David Cox. 2008.
   Design of the Java HotSpotTM client compiler for Java 6. ACM Transactions on Architecture and Code Optimization
   (TACO) 5, 1 (2008), 7.
Norbert Kuck, Oliver Schmidt, and Ralf Schmelter. 2009. Sharing classes and class loaders. (Nov. 3 2009). US Patent 7,614,045.
Erez Landau, Dean RE Long, and Nedim Fresko. 2011. Shared JAVA jar files. (Feb. 1 2011). US Patent 7,882,198.
Oracle. 2018. Java Class data sharing. (2018). https://docs.oracle.com/javase/10/vm/class-data-sharing.htm
Michael Paleczny, Christopher Vick, and Cliff Click. 2001. The Java hotspotTM Server Compiler. In Proceedings of the 2001
   Symposium on JavaTM Virtual Machine Research and Technology Symposium - Volume 1 (JVMÔÇÖ01). USENIX Association,
   Berkeley, CA, USA, 1ÔÇô1. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1267847.1267848


Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
ShareJIT: JIT Code Cache Sharing across Processes and Its Practical Implementation                               124:23

Oliver Schmidt, Norbert Kuck, Edgar Lott, Martin Strassburger, Arno Hilgenberg, and Ralf Schmelter. 2008. Sharing objects
   in runtime systems. (Aug. 19 2008). US Patent 7,415,704.
Toshio Suganuma, Takeshi Ogasawara, Mikio Takeuchi, Toshiaki Yasue, Motohiro Kawahito, Kazuaki Ishizaki, Hideaki
   Komatsu, and Toshio Nakatani. 2000. Overview of the IBM Java just-in-time compiler. ./i systems Journal 39, 1 (2000),
   175ÔÇô193.
TeamAA. 2018. What is Android Go? (2018). https://www.androidauthority.com/android-go-773037/
Michael Wintergerst. 2008. Centralized cache storage for runtime systems. (Aug. 26 2008). US Patent 7,418,560.
Bernard Wong, Grzegorz Czajkowski, and Laurent Dayn├Ęs. 2003. Dynamically loaded classes as shared libraries: An
   approach to improving virtual machine scalability. In Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium, 2003. Proceedings.
   International. IEEE, 10ÔÇôpp.
Yin Yan, Chunyu Chen, Karthik Dantu, Steven Y Ko, and Lukasz Ziarek. 2016. Using a multi-tasking VM for mobile
   applications. In Proceedings of the 17th International Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications. ACM,
   93ÔÇô98.




                          Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 2, No. OOPSLA, Article 124. Publication date: November 2018.
